website/src/app/docs/constraints/page.mdx, before:

# Constraints

> All constraint types (3 user-declared + 3 structural), the plugin architecture, and how constraint checking works.

---

## Overview

KindScript enforces architectural rules through **constraints** — rules declared on Kind types that are evaluated against the actual codebase. Each constraint type checks a different property.

> **Terminology:** Users declare *constraints* on Kind types. Internally, the compiler generates *contracts* — evaluable rules produced by `ConstraintProvider` plugins in the bind stage. The docs use "constraint" for the user-facing concept and "contract" for the internal domain entity.

| Constraint | Category | What It Checks | Diagnostic Code |
|----------|----------|----------------|-----------------|
| `noDependency` | Dependency | Layer A cannot import from Layer B | KS70001 |
| `purity` | Behavioral | Layer has no side-effect imports | KS70003 |
| `noCycles` | Dependency | No circular dependencies between layers | KS70004 |
| `scope` | Structural | Instance location matches Kind's declared scope | KS70005 |
| `overlap` | Structural | Two sibling members must not claim the same files | KS70006 |
| `exhaustive` | Structural | All files in instance scope must be assigned to a member | KS70007 |

---

## Declaring Constraints

Constraints are declared as the 3rd type parameter on `Kind<N, Members, Constraints>`:

```typescript
type OrderingContext = Kind<"OrderingContext", {
  domain: DomainLayer;
  application: ApplicationLayer;
  infrastructure: InfrastructureLayer;
}, {
  noDependency: [
    ["domain", "infrastructure"],
    ["domain", "application"],
  ];
  noCycles: ["domain", "application", "infrastructure"];
}>;
```

The `Constraints<Members>` type ensures member names are valid identifiers from the Kind's member map.

### Constraint Shapes

Constraints come in three shapes:

| Shape | Constraints | Declaration |
|-------|-------------|-------------|
| **Intrinsic** (applies to a member kind) | `pure` | `pure: true` on the member Kind |
| **Relational** (between two members) | `noDependency` | `[["from", "to"]]` |
| **Collective** (across a group) | `noCycles` | `["member1", "member2", ...]` |
| **Structural** (auto-generated) | `overlap`, `exhaustive` | Implicit or `exhaustive: true` |

---

## Constraint Types

### noDependency — Forbidden Dependency (KS70001)

Forbids any file in member A from importing any file in member B. This is the core mechanism for enforcing dependency direction in Clean Architecture, Hexagonal, Onion, etc.

```typescript
type Context = Kind<"Context", {
  domain: DomainLayer;
  infrastructure: InfrastructureLayer;
}, {
  noDependency: [["domain", "infrastructure"]];
}>;
```

**How it works:**
1. Resolves all files in the `from` member's directory (recursively)
2. Resolves all files in the `to` member's directory (into a Set)
3. For each file in `from`, uses the TypeScript type checker to resolve all imports
4. If any resolved import target is in the `to` member's file set, produces a violation

**Example violation:**
```
src/domain/service.ts:12:1 - error KS70001: Forbidden dependency: domain → infrastructure (src/domain/service.ts → src/infrastructure/database.ts)

  12 import { Db } from '../infrastructure/database';
     ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

**Notes:**
- Both `import` and `import type` are checked (type-only imports are not exempted)
- Dynamic imports (`import()` expressions) are not currently checked
- Re-exports through barrel files are detected at the resolved target level

### purity — Impure Import (KS70003)

Checks that a member marked `pure: true` does not import from Node.js built-in modules (fs, http, crypto, net, etc.). This enforces side-effect-free domain layers.

Purity is declared on the **member Kind** (not the parent Kind):

```typescript
type DomainLayer = Kind<"DomainLayer", {}, { pure: true }>;
```

**How it works:**
1. Resolves all files in the member's directory
2. For each file, extracts raw import module specifiers
3. Checks each specifier against the `NODE_BUILTINS` list (includes `node:` prefix variants)
4. If a file imports a built-in module, produces a violation

**Example violation:**
```
src/domain/service.ts:1:1 - error KS70003: Impure import in 'domain': 'fs'

  1 import { readFileSync } from 'fs';
    ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

### noCycles — Circular Dependency (KS70004)

Detects circular dependency chains between members. If member A imports from member B, and member B imports from member A (directly or transitively through other members), this is a violation.

```typescript
type Context = Kind<"Context", {
  domain: DomainLayer;
  application: ApplicationLayer;
  infrastructure: InfrastructureLayer;
}, {
  noCycles: ["domain", "application", "infrastructure"];
}>;
```

**How it works:**
1. Builds an import graph between the specified members
2. Runs Tarjan's SCC (strongly connected components) algorithm
3. Any SCC with more than one member is a cycle → violation

**Example violation:**
```
error KS70004: Circular dependency detected: domain → infrastructure → domain
```

### overlap — Member Overlap (KS70006)

Detects when two sibling members within the same instance claim the same file(s). This is an **implicit** check — the binder generates overlap contracts automatically for every pair of sibling members. No user-facing constraint syntax is needed.

**How it works:**
1. For each instance, the binder generates one overlap contract per pair of sibling members
2. During checking, the plugin intersects the resolved file sets of both members
3. If any file appears in both sets, produces a violation

**Example violation:**
```
[a] - error KS70006: Member overlap: "a" and "b" share 1 file(s): src/sub/code.ts
```

**Notes:**
- Overlap checking is automatic — users don't need to declare it
- The binder generates `C(n, 2)` overlap contracts for `n` sibling members
- Folder-scoped members that contain sub-members will naturally produce overlaps unless member locations are disjoint

### exhaustive — Unassigned Code (KS70007)

Checks that every file within an instance's scope is assigned to at least one member. Opt-in via `exhaustive: true` in the Kind's constraints.

```typescript
type App = Kind<"App", {
  core: [Core, './core'];
  infra: [Infra, './infra'];
}, {
  exhaustive: true;
}>;
```

**How it works:**
1. Resolves the instance's container (all files under the instance root)
2. Collects all files assigned to members via `resolvedFiles`
3. Any file in the container but not in any member is flagged as unassigned

**Default exclusions** (not flagged as unassigned):
- `context.ts` / `context.tsx` — instance declaration files
- `*.test.ts` / `*.spec.ts` — test files
- Files inside `__tests__/` directories

**Example violation:**
```
[app] - error KS70007: Unassigned file: "src/orphan.ts" is not in any member of app
```

---

## Intrinsic Constraints

Most constraints are declared on a parent Kind and reference its members by name (e.g., `noDependency: [["domain", "infrastructure"]]`). **Intrinsic constraints** work differently — they are declared on a member Kind itself and automatically propagate to every parent instance that uses that member.

Currently only `purity` supports intrinsic propagation.

### How It Works

1. **Declare purity on the member Kind:**

```typescript
type DomainLayer = Kind<"DomainLayer", {}, { pure: true }>;
```

2. **Use it as a member in a parent Kind:**

```typescript
type OrderingContext = Kind<"OrderingContext", {
  domain: DomainLayer;
  infrastructure: InfrastructureLayer;
}>;
```

3. **The binder detects and propagates:**

During the bind stage, `BindService` inspects each member Kind's constraints. When it finds `pure: true` on `DomainLayer`, it calls `purityPlugin.intrinsic.propagate()` to create a `Purity` contract targeting the `domain` member in every `OrderingContext` instance — without the parent Kind needing to declare purity explicitly.

### Why Intrinsic?

Some constraints are properties of the member itself, not relationships between members. Purity is inherent to `DomainLayer` — it should be pure everywhere it's used, not just in contexts that remember to declare it. Intrinsic propagation makes this automatic.

### Plugin Support

A plugin supports intrinsic behavior by providing an `intrinsic` object with two methods:

- `detect(view: TypeNodeView): boolean` — returns true if the member Kind's constraints contain this intrinsic (e.g., has a `pure` boolean property)
- `propagate(memberSymbol, memberName, location): Contract` — creates the contract for this member

The binder deduplicates: if a parent Kind explicitly declares the same constraint, the intrinsic propagation is skipped.

---

## Constraint Plugin Architecture

Each constraint type is implemented as a `ContractPlugin` — a self-contained object with validation, checking, and optional generation logic.

### Plugin Interface

Each `ContractPlugin` extends `ConstraintProvider` (the bind-stage view) with enforcement capabilities:

```typescript
interface ConstraintProvider {
  readonly constraintName: string;
  generate?: (value: TypeNodeView, instanceSymbol: ArchSymbol, kindName: string, location: string) => GeneratorResult;
  intrinsic?: {
    detect(view: TypeNodeView): boolean;
    propagate(memberSymbol: ArchSymbol, memberName: string, location: string): Contract;
  };
}

interface ContractPlugin extends ConstraintProvider {
  readonly type: ContractType;
  readonly diagnosticCode: number;

  validate(args: ArchSymbol[]): string | null;
  check(contract: Contract, ctx: CheckContext): CheckResult;

  codeFix?: { fixName: string; description: string };
}
```

### Plugin Registry

All 6 plugins are registered in `plugin-registry.ts`. Each plugin is a singleton object (not a factory function):

```typescript
function createAllPlugins(): ContractPlugin[] {
  return [
    noDependencyPlugin,
    purityPlugin,
    noCyclesPlugin,
    scopePlugin,
    overlapPlugin,
    exhaustivenessPlugin,
  ];
}
```

The `CheckerService` is a thin dispatcher (~60 lines) that:
1. Receives contracts and resolved files
2. Looks up the appropriate plugin for each contract's type
3. Delegates checking to the plugin
4. Aggregates all diagnostics

### Adding a New Constraint Type

1. Add the contract type to `src/domain/types/contract-type.ts`
2. Add the diagnostic code to `src/domain/constants/diagnostic-codes.ts`
3. Create the plugin in `src/application/pipeline/plugins/<name>/<name>.plugin.ts`
4. Register it in `plugins/plugin-registry.ts`
5. Add unit tests in `tests/application/<name>.plugin.test.ts`
6. Add integration tests and fixtures
7. Add E2E tests in `tests/cli/e2e/cli.e2e.test.ts`

### Walkthrough: Implementing a Plugin

See any plugin in `src/application/pipeline/plugins/` for a reference implementation. Each plugin is a singleton object implementing `ContractPlugin` with:

1. **Domain types** — Add `ContractType` enum value and `DiagnosticCode` constant
2. **Plugin file** — Implement `type`, `constraintName`, `diagnosticCode`, `validate()`, `check()`, and optionally `generate()` / `intrinsic`
3. **Register** — Add to `createAllPlugins()` in `plugin-registry.ts`
4. **Tests** — Every plugin needs validation, check, and generate tests

All 6 existing plugins follow this pattern.

---

## How Contract Checking Works

### Data Flow

```
PipelineService (orchestrator)
    → reads config, discovers source files, creates TS program

ScanService (scanner)
    → walks AST with type checker via ASTViewPort
    → extracts KindDefinitionView[] and InstanceDeclarationView[]

ParseService (parser)
    → builds ArchSymbol trees from scan output
    → derives filesystem locations from member names
    → purely structural (no I/O)

BindService (binder)
    → resolves symbol locations to files (directory/file/declaration)
    → walks constraint trees from Kind definitions
    → generates Contract[] via ConstraintProvider plugins
    → propagates intrinsic constraints (e.g., pure: true)
    → produces resolvedFiles: Map<location, files[]>

CheckerService (checker)
    → for each Contract:
        → validate arguments (plugin.validate)
        → evaluate against resolved files and imports (plugin.check)
        → collect Diagnostic[]
    → return all diagnostics
```

### TypeKind Member Resolution

When TypeKind members are used inside a filesystem Kind, the binder resolves them differently from filesystem members:

- **Filesystem members:** `readDirectory()` on the derived path (folder resolution) or single file (file resolution)
- **TypeKind members:** collect all typed exports within the parent Kind's scope that match the TypeKind name (declaration resolution)

Both resolution paths populate the same `resolvedFiles: Map<string, string[]>` data structure in `BindResult`. The checker operates on this unified map — existing constraint plugins (`noDependency`, `noCycles`, etc.) work unchanged with TypeKind members.

### What the Checker Receives

The checker receives **pre-resolved data** — it does zero live I/O during checking:

- `contracts: Contract[]` — all contracts to evaluate
- `symbols: ArchSymbol[]` — all architectural symbols
- `resolvedFiles: Map<string, string[]>` — location → file list mapping
- `tsPort: TypeScriptPort` — for import resolution and interface analysis

This separation means:
- The checker is testable with mock data (no filesystem needed)
- File resolution happens once, not per-contract
- The checker focuses purely on evaluation logic

Commit message:

docs: update website and README for unified Kind model
Website (src/app/docs/*.mdx):
- Update kind-system page: remove TypeKind as separate type, explain wrapped Kinds as Kind with wraps config
- Update constraints page: reflect carrier-based resolution
- Update tutorial-guide: use InstanceOf<K> syntax instead of bare type annotations

Website components:
- Update BrowserCheck.tsx for TypeScript 5.8+ compatibility

README:
- Update TypeKind composability example to use Kind<..., { wraps: T }> + InstanceOf<K>
- Update feature list to reference "wrapped Kind composability"
- Update notebook reference from typekind to wrapped-kind

These changes complete the website documentation updates from the
TypeKind elimination refactor and align with the carrier model.

website/src/app/docs/constraints/page.mdx, after:

# Constraints

> All constraint types (3 user-declared + 3 structural), the plugin architecture, and how constraint checking works.

---

## Overview

KindScript enforces architectural rules through **constraints** — rules declared on Kind types that are evaluated against the actual codebase. Each constraint type checks a different property.

> **Terminology:** Users declare *constraints* on Kind types. Internally, the compiler generates *contracts* — evaluable rules produced by `ConstraintProvider` plugins in the bind stage. The docs use "constraint" for the user-facing concept and "contract" for the internal domain entity.

| Constraint | Category | What It Checks | Diagnostic Code |
|----------|----------|----------------|-----------------|
| `noDependency` | Dependency | Layer A cannot import from Layer B | KS70001 |
| `purity` | Behavioral | Layer has no side-effect imports | KS70003 |
| `noCycles` | Dependency | No circular dependencies between layers | KS70004 |
| `scope` | Structural | Instance location matches Kind's declared scope | KS70005 |
| `overlap` | Structural | Two sibling members must not claim the same files | KS70006 |
| `exhaustive` | Structural | All files in instance scope must be assigned to a member | KS70007 |

---

## Declaring Constraints

Constraints are declared as the 3rd type parameter on `Kind<N, Members, Constraints>`:

```typescript
type OrderingContext = Kind<"OrderingContext", {
  domain: DomainLayer;
  application: ApplicationLayer;
  infrastructure: InfrastructureLayer;
}, {
  noDependency: [
    ["domain", "infrastructure"],
    ["domain", "application"],
  ];
  noCycles: ["domain", "application", "infrastructure"];
}>;
```

The `Constraints<Members>` type ensures member names are valid identifiers from the Kind's member map.

### Constraint Shapes

Constraints come in three shapes:

| Shape | Constraints | Declaration |
|-------|-------------|-------------|
| **Intrinsic** (applies to a member kind) | `pure` | `pure: true` on the member Kind |
| **Relational** (between two members) | `noDependency` | `[["from", "to"]]` |
| **Collective** (across a group) | `noCycles` | `["member1", "member2", ...]` |
| **Structural** (auto-generated) | `overlap`, `exhaustive` | Implicit or `exhaustive: true` |

---

## Constraint Types

### noDependency — Forbidden Dependency (KS70001)

Forbids any file in member A from importing any file in member B. This is the core mechanism for enforcing dependency direction in Clean Architecture, Hexagonal, Onion, etc.

```typescript
type Context = Kind<"Context", {
  domain: DomainLayer;
  infrastructure: InfrastructureLayer;
}, {
  noDependency: [["domain", "infrastructure"]];
}>;
```

**How it works:**
1. Resolves all files in the `from` member's directory (recursively)
2. Resolves all files in the `to` member's directory (into a Set)
3. For each file in `from`, uses the TypeScript type checker to resolve all imports
4. If any resolved import target is in the `to` member's file set, produces a violation

**Example violation:**
```
src/domain/service.ts:12:1 - error KS70001: Forbidden dependency: domain → infrastructure (src/domain/service.ts → src/infrastructure/database.ts)

  12 import { Db } from '../infrastructure/database';
     ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

**Notes:**
- Both `import` and `import type` are checked (type-only imports are not exempted)
- Dynamic imports (`import()` expressions) are not currently checked
- Re-exports through barrel files are detected at the resolved target level

### purity — Impure Import (KS70003)

Checks that a member marked `pure: true` does not import from Node.js built-in modules (fs, http, crypto, net, etc.). This enforces side-effect-free domain layers.

Purity is declared on the **member Kind** (not the parent Kind):

```typescript
type DomainLayer = Kind<"DomainLayer", {}, { pure: true }>;
```

**How it works:**
1. Resolves all files in the member's directory
2. For each file, extracts raw import module specifiers
3. Checks each specifier against the `NODE_BUILTINS` list (includes `node:` prefix variants)
4. If a file imports a built-in module, produces a violation

**Example violation:**
```
src/domain/service.ts:1:1 - error KS70003: Impure import in 'domain': 'fs'

  1 import { readFileSync } from 'fs';
    ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

### noCycles — Circular Dependency (KS70004)

Detects circular dependency chains between members. If member A imports from member B, and member B imports from member A (directly or transitively through other members), this is a violation.

```typescript
type Context = Kind<"Context", {
  domain: DomainLayer;
  application: ApplicationLayer;
  infrastructure: InfrastructureLayer;
}, {
  noCycles: ["domain", "application", "infrastructure"];
}>;
```

**How it works:**
1. Builds an import graph between the specified members
2. Runs Tarjan's SCC (strongly connected components) algorithm
3. Any SCC with more than one member is a cycle → violation

**Example violation:**
```
error KS70004: Circular dependency detected: domain → infrastructure → domain
```

### overlap — Member Overlap (KS70006)

Detects when two sibling members within the same instance claim the same file(s). This is an **implicit** check — the binder generates overlap contracts automatically for every pair of sibling members. No user-facing constraint syntax is needed.

**How it works:**
1. For each instance, the binder generates one overlap contract per pair of sibling members
2. During checking, the plugin intersects the resolved file sets of both members
3. If any file appears in both sets, produces a violation

**Example violation:**
```
[a] - error KS70006: Member overlap: "a" and "b" share 1 file(s): src/sub/code.ts
```

**Notes:**
- Overlap checking is automatic — users don't need to declare it
- The binder generates `C(n, 2)` overlap contracts for `n` sibling members
- Folder-scoped members that contain sub-members will naturally produce overlaps unless member locations are disjoint

### exhaustive — Unassigned Code (KS70007)

Checks that every file within an instance's scope is assigned to at least one member. Opt-in via `exhaustive: true` in the Kind's constraints.

```typescript
type App = Kind<"App", {
  core: [Core, './core'];
  infra: [Infra, './infra'];
}, {
  exhaustive: true;
}>;
```

**How it works:**
1. Resolves the instance's container (all files under the instance root)
2. Collects all files assigned to members via `resolvedFiles`
3. Any file in the container but not in any member is flagged as unassigned

**Default exclusions** (not flagged as unassigned):
- `context.ts` / `context.tsx` — instance declaration files
- `*.test.ts` / `*.spec.ts` — test files
- Files inside `__tests__/` directories

**Example violation:**
```
[app] - error KS70007: Unassigned file: "src/orphan.ts" is not in any member of app
```

---

## Intrinsic Constraints

Most constraints are declared on a parent Kind and reference its members by name (e.g., `noDependency: [["domain", "infrastructure"]]`). **Intrinsic constraints** work differently — they are declared on a member Kind itself and automatically propagate to every parent instance that uses that member.

Currently only `purity` supports intrinsic propagation.

### How It Works

1. **Declare purity on the member Kind:**

```typescript
type DomainLayer = Kind<"DomainLayer", {}, { pure: true }>;
```

2. **Use it as a member in a parent Kind:**

```typescript
type OrderingContext = Kind<"OrderingContext", {
  domain: DomainLayer;
  infrastructure: InfrastructureLayer;
}>;
```

3. **The binder detects and propagates:**

During the bind stage, `BindService` inspects each member Kind's constraints. When it finds `pure: true` on `DomainLayer`, it calls `purityPlugin.intrinsic.propagate()` to create a `Purity` contract targeting the `domain` member in every `OrderingContext` instance — without the parent Kind needing to declare purity explicitly.

### Why Intrinsic?

Some constraints are properties of the member itself, not relationships between members. Purity is inherent to `DomainLayer` — it should be pure everywhere it's used, not just in contexts that remember to declare it. Intrinsic propagation makes this automatic.

### Plugin Support

A plugin supports intrinsic behavior by providing an `intrinsic` object with two methods:

- `detect(view: TypeNodeView): boolean` — returns true if the member Kind's constraints contain this intrinsic (e.g., has a `pure` boolean property)
- `propagate(memberSymbol, memberName, location): Contract` — creates the contract for this member

The binder deduplicates: if a parent Kind explicitly declares the same constraint, the intrinsic propagation is skipped.

---

## Constraint Plugin Architecture

Each constraint type is implemented as a `ContractPlugin` — a self-contained object with validation, checking, and optional generation logic.

### Plugin Interface

Each `ContractPlugin` extends `ConstraintProvider` (the bind-stage view) with enforcement capabilities:

```typescript
interface ConstraintProvider {
  readonly constraintName: string;
  generate?: (value: TypeNodeView, instanceSymbol: ArchSymbol, kindName: string, location: string) => GeneratorResult;
  intrinsic?: {
    detect(view: TypeNodeView): boolean;
    propagate(memberSymbol: ArchSymbol, memberName: string, location: string): Contract;
  };
}

interface ContractPlugin extends ConstraintProvider {
  readonly type: ContractType;
  readonly diagnosticCode: number;

  validate(args: ArchSymbol[]): string | null;
  check(contract: Contract, ctx: CheckContext): CheckResult;

  codeFix?: { fixName: string; description: string };
}
```

### Plugin Registry

All 6 plugins are registered in `plugin-registry.ts`. Each plugin is a singleton object (not a factory function):

```typescript
function createAllPlugins(): ContractPlugin[] {
  return [
    noDependencyPlugin,
    purityPlugin,
    noCyclesPlugin,
    scopePlugin,
    overlapPlugin,
    exhaustivenessPlugin,
  ];
}
```

The `CheckerService` is a thin dispatcher (~60 lines) that:
1. Receives contracts and resolved files
2. Looks up the appropriate plugin for each contract's type
3. Delegates checking to the plugin
4. Aggregates all diagnostics

### Adding a New Constraint Type

1. Add the contract type to `src/domain/types/contract-type.ts`
2. Add the diagnostic code to `src/domain/constants/diagnostic-codes.ts`
3. Create the plugin in `src/application/pipeline/plugins/<name>/<name>.plugin.ts`
4. Register it in `plugins/plugin-registry.ts`
5. Add unit tests in `tests/application/<name>.plugin.test.ts`
6. Add integration tests and fixtures
7. Add E2E tests in `tests/cli/e2e/cli.e2e.test.ts`

### Walkthrough: Implementing a Plugin

See any plugin in `src/application/pipeline/plugins/` for a reference implementation. Each plugin is a singleton object implementing `ContractPlugin` with:

1. **Domain types** — Add `ContractType` enum value and `DiagnosticCode` constant
2. **Plugin file** — Implement `type`, `constraintName`, `diagnosticCode`, `validate()`, `check()`, and optionally `generate()` / `intrinsic`
3. **Register** — Add to `createAllPlugins()` in `plugin-registry.ts`
4. **Tests** — Every plugin needs validation, check, and generate tests

All 6 existing plugins follow this pattern.

---

## How Contract Checking Works

### Data Flow

```
PipelineService (orchestrator)
    → reads config, discovers source files, creates TS program

ScanService (scanner)
    → walks AST with type checker via ASTViewPort
    → extracts KindDefinitionView[] and InstanceDeclarationView[]

ParseService (parser)
    → builds ArchSymbol trees from scan output
    → derives filesystem locations from member names
    → purely structural (no I/O)

BindService (binder)
    → resolves symbol locations to files (directory/file/declaration)
    → walks constraint trees from Kind definitions
    → generates Contract[] via ConstraintProvider plugins
    → propagates intrinsic constraints (e.g., pure: true)
    → produces resolvedFiles: Map<location, files[]>

CheckerService (checker)
    → for each Contract:
        → validate arguments (plugin.validate)
        → evaluate against resolved files and imports (plugin.check)
        → collect Diagnostic[]
    → return all diagnostics
```

### Wrapped Kind Member Resolution

When wrapped Kind members are used inside a filesystem Kind, the binder resolves them differently from filesystem members:

- **Filesystem members:** `readDirectory()` on the derived path (folder resolution) or single file (file resolution)
- **Wrapped Kind members:** collect all typed exports within the parent Kind's scope that use `InstanceOf<K>` (declaration resolution)

Both resolution paths populate the same `resolvedFiles: Map<string, string[]>` data structure in `BindResult`. The checker operates on this unified map — existing constraint plugins (`noDependency`, `noCycles`, etc.) work unchanged with wrapped Kind members.

### What the Checker Receives

The checker receives **pre-resolved data** — it does zero live I/O during checking:

- `contracts: Contract[]` — all contracts to evaluate
- `symbols: ArchSymbol[]` — all architectural symbols
- `resolvedFiles: Map<string, string[]>` — location → file list mapping
- `tsPort: TypeScriptPort` — for import resolution and interface analysis

This separation means:
- The checker is testable with mock data (no filesystem needed)
- File resolution happens once, not per-contract
- The checker focuses purely on evaluation logic
