docs/02-kind-system.md, before:

# The Kind System

> Kind definitions, instances, location resolution, and discovery.

---

## Overview

KindScript's type system has two primitives:

1. **Kind definitions** — type-level declarations of architectural patterns (`type X = Kind<...>`)
2. **Instance declarations** — value-level declarations mapping patterns to a specific codebase (`satisfies Instance<T, Path>`)

Kinds are normative (what the architecture MUST look like). Instances are descriptive (where the code ACTUALLY lives). The compiler compares them and reports violations.

---

## Kind Definitions

A Kind is a TypeScript type alias using the `Kind<N, Members, Constraints, Config>` generic. `Kind` is a conditional type — when `Config` includes `wraps`, it produces a wrapped type for declaration-level enforcement via `InstanceOf<K>`; otherwise it produces a structural type for `satisfies Instance<T, Path>`.

```typescript
import type { Kind } from 'kindscript';

// Leaf kind (no members)
type DomainLayer = Kind<"DomainLayer">;

// Leaf kind with constraints
type PureDomainLayer = Kind<"PureDomainLayer", {}, { pure: true }>;

// Composite kind with members
type CleanContext = Kind<"CleanContext", {
  domain: DomainLayer;
  application: ApplicationLayer;
  infrastructure: InfrastructureLayer;
}>;

// Composite kind with members AND constraints
type StrictCleanContext = Kind<"StrictCleanContext", {
  domain: DomainLayer;
  application: ApplicationLayer;
  infrastructure: InfrastructureLayer;
}, {
  noDependency: [
    ["domain", "infrastructure"],
    ["domain", "application"],
  ];
  pure: true;  // applies to this kind's own scope
}>;
```

### The Type Parameters

| Parameter | Required | Purpose |
|-----------|----------|---------|
| `N` (name) | Yes | String literal discriminant — must match the type alias name |
| `Members` | No | Object type mapping member names to their Kind types (plain or `[KindRef, './path']` tuples) |
| `Constraints` | No | `Constraints<Members>` — architectural rules to enforce |
| `_Config` | No | `KindConfig` — `{ wraps?: T; scope?: 'folder' \| 'file' }`. `wraps` makes Kind produce a wrapped type for declaration-level enforcement via `InstanceOf<K>`. `scope` declares the expected instance scope, validated by the scope plugin. |

### Why `type` Instead of `interface`

KindScript uses `type X = Kind<...>` (type alias), not `interface X extends Kind<...>`. Reasons:

- **No redundant name** — `interface` required the name twice (`interface Foo extends Kind<"Foo">`)
- **Cleaner syntax** — no empty `{}` for leaf kinds
- **Constraints as type parameters** — the 3rd type parameter on `Kind` carries constraints naturally
- **No false inheritance** — `extends` implied OOP inheritance, but kinds are pure type-level concepts

---

## Instance Declarations

An instance maps a Kind to a specific location in a codebase using `satisfies Instance<T, Path>`:

```typescript
import type { Kind, Instance } from 'kindscript';

type DomainLayer = Kind<"DomainLayer">;
type InfrastructureLayer = Kind<"InfrastructureLayer">;

type OrderingContext = Kind<"OrderingContext", {
  domain: DomainLayer;
  infrastructure: InfrastructureLayer;
}, {
  noDependency: [["domain", "infrastructure"]];
}>;

// Instance declaration — context file is inside the directory it governs
export const ordering = {
  domain: {},
  infrastructure: {},
} satisfies Instance<OrderingContext, '.'>;
```

### What `satisfies` Gives Us

The `satisfies` keyword is valid TypeScript — no macros, no transforms, no runtime. It provides:

1. **Type safety** — TypeScript validates the member object structure at compile time
2. **Zero runtime** — `import type` is fully erased; no `kindscript` dependency at runtime
3. **IDE support** — autocomplete, hover docs, go-to-definition all work natively

### Explicit Location

The second type parameter on `Instance<T, Path>` specifies where the instance lives, relative to the declaration file (same resolution semantics as TypeScript imports):

```typescript
// src/context.ts — '.' resolves to src/
export const app = { domain: {}, infra: {} } satisfies Instance<App, '.'>;

// src/architecture.ts — './ordering' resolves to src/ordering/
export const ordering = { domain: {}, infra: {} } satisfies Instance<App, './ordering'>;

// src/components/atoms/Button/Button.tsx — './Button.tsx' resolves to the file itself
export const _ = {} satisfies Instance<AtomSource, './Button.tsx'>;
```

Path syntax determines granularity:
- `'./ordering'` — folder (directory tree, all `.ts` files recursively)
- `'./helpers.ts'` — file (single source file)
- `'./handlers.ts#validate'` — sub-file (specific named export)

Location is required. Omitting it is a scanner error.

---

## Explicit Member Locations

Members can specify their filesystem location explicitly using tuple syntax:

```typescript
type App = Kind<"App", {
  domain: [DomainLayer, './domain'];             // explicit: member lives at ./domain
  application: [ApplicationLayer, './application'];
  infrastructure: [InfraLayer, './infrastructure'];
}>;
```

The tuple `[KindRef, string]` pairs a Kind type with its relative path from the instance root. This decouples member names from filesystem paths — a member named `core` can live at `./domain`, and vice versa.

Without a tuple, the member path is derived from the member name (e.g., member `domain` resolves to `./domain`). Wrapped Kind members (matched by type annotation, not path) always use plain syntax:

```typescript
type OrderModule = Kind<"OrderModule", {
  deciders: Decider;              // wrapped Kind — matched by type annotation, no path needed
  effectors: Effector;            // wrapped Kind — matched by type annotation, no path needed
  helpers: [HelperKind, './lib']; // explicit: helpers are at ./lib, not ./helpers
}>;
```

---

## Location Resolution

KindScript resolves the instance root from the declared path, then derives member paths from explicit locations or member names.

### Root Resolution

The declared path is resolved relative to the directory of the declaring file, using the same semantics as TypeScript import paths:

- `'.'` — directory of the declaring file
- `'./src'` — `src/` subdirectory relative to the declaring file
- `'../sibling'` — a sibling directory one level up

### Composite Instance (Directory Scope)

Given this file at `src/context.ts`:

```typescript
export const ordering = {
  domain: {},
  infrastructure: {},
} satisfies Instance<OrderingContext, '.'>;
```

KindScript resolves:
- **Root:** `src/` (declared path `'.'` resolves to the directory of `context.ts`)
- **domain:** `src/domain/` (root + member name)
- **infrastructure:** `src/infrastructure/` (root + member name)

### Leaf Instance (File Scope)

Given this file at `src/components/atoms/Button/v1.0.0/Button.tsx`:

```typescript
type AtomSource = Kind<"AtomSource", {}, { pure: true }>;

export const _ = {} satisfies Instance<AtomSource, './Button.tsx'>;
```

KindScript resolves:
- **Location:** `Button.tsx` itself (the path ends with `.tsx`, so it's a single file)

Constraints on `AtomSource` (like `pure`) apply only to `Button.tsx`. Other files in the same directory (`Button.stories.tsx`, `Button.test.tsx`) are unaffected.

### Path Granularity

| Path syntax | Example | Resolves to | Constraints apply to |
|-------------|---------|-------------|---------------------|
| No extension | `'.'`, `'./ordering'` | Directory | All `.ts`/`.tsx` files recursively |
| `.ts` / `.tsx` extension | `'./Button.tsx'` | Single file | That file only |
| Hash syntax | `'./handlers.ts#validate'` | Named export in file | That specific export |

### Scope Validation

Kinds can declare their expected instance scope using the `scope` property in `Kind`'s 4th type parameter (`_Config`):

```typescript
type KindConfig = { wraps?: unknown; scope?: 'folder' | 'file' };
```

When a Kind declares a scope, the compiler validates that instance locations match:

```typescript
// This Kind expects instances to point at folders
type PureModule = Kind<"PureModule", {}, { pure: true }, { scope: "folder" }>;

// Valid — '.' resolves to a directory
export const m = {} satisfies Instance<PureModule, '.'>;

// Violation (KS70005) — './module.ts' is a file, not a folder
export const m = {} satisfies Instance<PureModule, './module.ts'>;
```

The scope plugin generates a `Scope` contract during the bind stage and validates it during the check stage. If the instance's resolved location doesn't match the declared scope, a `KS70005: Scope mismatch` diagnostic is produced.

| Declared scope | Instance path must resolve to |
|---------------|------------------------------|
| `"folder"` | A directory (no `.ts`/`.tsx` extension) |
| `"file"` | A file (`.ts` or `.tsx` extension) |
| Not declared | No scope validation (any path is accepted) |

### Nested Members

For kinds with nested members, paths compose naturally:

```typescript
type DomainLayer = Kind<"DomainLayer", {
  entities: EntitiesModule;
  ports: PortsModule;
}>;

type CleanContext = Kind<"CleanContext", {
  domain: DomainLayer;
}>;
```

If the instance is at `src/context.ts`:
- `domain` → `src/domain/`
- `domain.entities` → `src/domain/entities/`
- `domain.ports` → `src/domain/ports/`

---

## Multi-Instance (Bounded Contexts)

Multiple instances of the same Kind can coexist in a project. Each instance has its own root, derived from its file location:

```
src/
  ordering/
    ordering.ts           # OrderingContext instance → root is src/ordering/
    domain/
    infrastructure/
  billing/
    billing.ts            # BillingContext instance → root is src/billing/
    domain/
    adapters/
```

```typescript
// src/ordering/ordering.ts
export const ordering = {
  domain: {},
  infrastructure: {},
} satisfies Instance<OrderingContext, '.'>;

// src/billing/billing.ts
export const billing = {
  domain: {},
  adapters: {},
} satisfies Instance<BillingContext, '.'>;
```

Each instance is checked independently. Contracts on `OrderingContext` only apply to files under `src/ordering/`. Contracts on `BillingContext` only apply to files under `src/billing/`.

---

## Carriers — Internal Representation

**Carriers** are the internal algebraic representation of "what code a symbol operates over." Users don't write carriers directly — they write Kind definitions and Instance declarations. The parser computes carriers from this user-facing syntax.

### Carrier Algebra

A carrier is an algebraic expression built from atoms and operations:

**Atoms:**
- `path` — code at a filesystem path (directory or file, determined at resolution time)
- `tagged` — all declarations annotated with `InstanceOf<K>` across the entire project

**Operations:**
- `union` — files from any child carrier
- `exclude` — files from base minus files from excluded
- `intersect` — files common to all child carriers

### Example Carriers

```typescript
// Structural Kind instance at './src/domain/'
{ type: 'path', path: '/project/src/domain' }

// Wrapped Kind member (scopeless)
{ type: 'tagged', kindTypeName: 'Decider' }

// Scoped wrapped Kind member (tagged exports within parent scope)
{
  type: 'intersect',
  children: [
    { type: 'tagged', kindTypeName: 'Decider' },
    { type: 'path', path: '/project/src/ordering' }
  ]
}

// Union of multiple paths
{
  type: 'union',
  children: [
    { type: 'path', path: '/project/src/domain' },
    { type: 'path', path: '/project/src/application' }
  ]
}
```

### Key Functions

- `carrierKey(carrier: CarrierExpr): string` — deterministic serialization usable as a Map key. For path carriers, returns the raw path string (ensures backward compatibility with `symbol.id` lookup pattern).
- `hasTaggedAtom(carrier: CarrierExpr): boolean` — checks if a carrier contains a tagged atom, replacing the old `isWrappedKind()` pattern.

### Resolution

Carriers are **pure values** — they have no behavior, no resolution logic, no filesystem access. The `CarrierResolver` service (application layer) translates carrier expressions into concrete file lists by:

1. **Path atoms** — filesystem probing (directory listing or single file)
2. **Tagged atoms** — filtering tagged exports from scan results
3. **Operations** — set algebra on child results (union, intersection, difference)

Scoping is expressed through composition, not built into atoms. A "scoped tagged carrier" is `intersect(tagged(K), path(scope))`.

---

## Discovery via TypeScript Piggybacking

KindScript does not use file extensions, config files, or naming conventions to find definitions. Instead, it piggybacks on TypeScript's own type checker.

### How Discovery Works

1. The `ASTAdapter` walks each source file in the TypeScript program
2. For type aliases, it uses `checker.getSymbolAtLocation()` to check if the type reference resolves to `Kind` from the `'kindscript'` package
3. For `satisfies` expressions, it checks if the type reference resolves to `Instance` from `'kindscript'`
4. This works through aliases, re-exports, and any valid TypeScript import path

### What This Means

- **No `.k.ts` extension** — definitions live in regular `.ts` files
- **No `kindscript.json`** — no config file needed for discovery
- **No naming convention** — any file name works
- **Alias-safe** — `import type { Kind as K } from 'kindscript'` works (because the type checker resolves the original symbol)
- **Invisible** — KindScript adds zero artifacts to a project beyond the type imports

---

## MemberMap

`MemberMap<T>` is the internal type projection used by `Instance<T, Path>` — it transforms a Kind into the object shape you write with `satisfies`. Users typically use `Instance<T, Path>` directly and never reference `MemberMap<T>` themselves.

The `MemberMap<T>` type transforms a Kind type into its instance shape — the object type used with `satisfies Instance<T, Path>`:

```typescript
type MemberMap<T extends KindRef> = {
  [K in keyof T as K extends 'kind' | 'location' | '__kindscript_ref' | '__kindscript_brand' ? never : K]:
    T[K] extends KindRef
      ? MemberMap<T[K]> | Record<string, never>
      : never;
};
```

It strips the `kind`, `location`, and internal phantom properties (which are derived automatically), keeps member names, and recursively applies to child Kinds. Each member value is either a nested `MemberMap` (for Kinds with sub-members) or an empty object `{}` (for leaf Kinds). `KindRef` is a shared phantom marker type that both wrapped and structural Kinds satisfy. When members use tuple syntax (`[KindRef, string]`), `MemberMap` extracts the Kind from the tuple.

Member names must be valid TypeScript identifiers. By default, member names double as directory names for location resolution (e.g., member `domain` resolves to `./domain`). With explicit tuple locations, the path is independent of the name — a member named `core` at `[CoreKind, './domain']` resolves to `./domain`.

---

## Wrapped Kinds — Declaration-Level Enforcement

Where a plain Kind classifies **places** (directories and files), a wrapped Kind classifies **types** (individual exported declarations via their type annotations). A wrapped Kind is any Kind whose 4th type parameter (`_Config`) includes `wraps`.

### Defining a Wrapped Kind

```typescript
import type { Kind, InstanceOf } from 'kindscript';

type DeciderFn = (command: Command) => readonly Event[];
type Decider = Kind<"Decider", {}, {}, { wraps: DeciderFn }>;

// With constraints (3rd parameter):
type PureDecider = Kind<"PureDecider", {}, { pure: true }, { wraps: DeciderFn }>;
```

The 4th parameter `{ wraps: DeciderFn }` tells KindScript this Kind classifies individual declarations, not directories. The implementation uses a phantom brand: `T & { readonly __kindscript_brand?: N }`. The brand is optional, so any value of the wrapped type satisfies the Kind — zero assignability impact.

### Wrapped Kind Instances

Instances of wrapped Kinds are declared with an `InstanceOf<K>` type annotation on exports — no `satisfies`, no `register()`, no companion const:

```typescript
import type { InstanceOf } from 'kindscript';

// These are wrapped Kind instances (type annotation uses InstanceOf):
export const validateOrder: InstanceOf<Decider> = (cmd) => { ... };
export const applyDiscount: InstanceOf<Decider> = (cmd) => { ... };

// This is NOT an instance (DeciderFn is not a wrapped Kind):
export const helper: DeciderFn = (cmd) => { ... };

// This is NOT an instance (no explicit type annotation):
export const inline = (cmd: Command): Event[] => { ... };
```

Discovery is **syntactic** — the scanner checks whether the type annotation explicitly names a wrapped Kind via `InstanceOf`, not whether the value structurally matches. The developer's choice of type name is the opt-in signal.

### Composability with Structural Kinds

Wrapped Kind members can be used inside filesystem Kinds, enabling cross-scope constraints:

```typescript
type Decider = Kind<"Decider", {}, {}, { wraps: DeciderFn }>;
type Effector = Kind<"Effector", {}, {}, { wraps: EffectorFn }>;

type OrderModule = Kind<"OrderModule", {
  deciders: Decider;
  effectors: Effector;
}, {
  noDependency: [["deciders", "effectors"]];
}>;

export const order = {
  deciders: {},
  effectors: {},
} satisfies Instance<OrderModule, '.'>;
```

This means: "within the OrderModule directory, collect all `InstanceOf<Decider>` exports into one group and all `InstanceOf<Effector>` exports into another. No file containing a Decider may import from a file containing an Effector."

The binder resolves wrapped Kind members by scanning typed exports within the parent Kind's scope. Existing constraints (`noDependency`, `noCycles`, etc.) work unchanged — they operate on the `resolvedFiles` map, which the binder populates for both filesystem and wrapped Kind members.

### Wrapped Kind vs Structural Kind

| Aspect | Structural Kind | Wrapped Kind |
|--------|----------------|--------------|
| Classifies | Places (directories, files) | Types (exported declarations) |
| Scope | Directory or file | Individual declaration |
| Instance mechanism | `satisfies Instance<T, Path>` | `InstanceOf<K>` type annotation |
| Resolution | Filesystem paths (binder) | Typed-export collection within scope (binder) |
| Members | Subdirectories | As Kind members (composability) |
| Standalone constraints | All constraint types | All user-declared constraint types (via 3rd parameter) |
| Syntax | `Kind<N, Members, C>` | `Kind<N, {}, C, { wraps: T }>` |

---

## Public API

KindScript exports seven types from `src/types/index.ts`:

| Type | Purpose |
|------|---------|
| `Kind<N, Members?, Constraints?, Config?>` | Define an architectural pattern (conditional type) |
| `Instance<T, Path>` | Declare where a structural Kind is instantiated (used with `satisfies`) |
| `InstanceOf<K>` | Tag an export as an instance of a wrapped Kind (used as type annotation) |
| `MemberMap<T>` | Transforms a Kind type into its instance object shape (used internally by `Instance`) |
| `Constraints<Members>` | Type for the constraints parameter (usually inlined) |
| `KindConfig` | `{ wraps?: T; scope?: 'folder' \| 'file' }` — Kind behavior configuration |
| `KindRef` | Phantom marker type — shared by both wrapped and structural Kinds |

All exports are `export type` — zero runtime footprint.

Commit message:

feat!: remove InstanceOf type, implement TS-aligned symbol model
BREAKING CHANGE: Removed InstanceOf<K> type from public API.

Wrapped Kind exports now use direct type annotation instead of the
InstanceOf<K> wrapper type. This simplifies the API and makes wrapped
Kinds more intuitive.

Migration guide:
- Remove InstanceOf from imports: import type { Kind, InstanceOf } → import type { Kind }
- Update type annotations: export const x: InstanceOf<Decider> = ... → export const x: Decider = ...

Internal improvements:
- Unified carrier model with TS-aligned symbol ownership
- Symbols directly own their resolved files (symbol.files: string[])
- Carriers are parse-time intermediates consumed by the binder
- Renamed 'tagged' carrier type to 'annotation'
- Simplified checker context (removed resolvedFiles/containerFiles/declarationOwnership maps)
- Scanner detects wrapped Kind exports via direct type annotation

Documentation:
- Updated all 6 core docs chapters
- Updated 4 interactive tutorial lessons
- Updated website documentation pages
- Added comprehensive CHANGELOG entry with migration guide

Test changes:
- Added 7 new tests for direct annotation detection
- Removed 10 legacy InstanceOf tests
- Updated all 13 wrapped Kind fixtures
- All 381 tests passing

Version: 1.0.1 → 2.0.0

docs/02-kind-system.md, after:

# The Kind System

> Kind definitions, instances, location resolution, and discovery.

---

## Overview

KindScript's type system has two primitives:

1. **Kind definitions** — type-level declarations of architectural patterns (`type X = Kind<...>`)
2. **Instance declarations** — value-level declarations mapping patterns to a specific codebase (`satisfies Instance<T, Path>`)

Kinds are normative (what the architecture MUST look like). Instances are descriptive (where the code ACTUALLY lives). The compiler compares them and reports violations.

---

## Kind Definitions

A Kind is a TypeScript type alias using the `Kind<N, Members, Constraints, Config>` generic. `Kind` is a conditional type — when `Config` includes `wraps`, it produces a wrapped type for declaration-level enforcement via direct type annotation; otherwise it produces a structural type for `satisfies Instance<T, Path>`.

```typescript
import type { Kind } from 'kindscript';

// Leaf kind (no members)
type DomainLayer = Kind<"DomainLayer">;

// Leaf kind with constraints
type PureDomainLayer = Kind<"PureDomainLayer", {}, { pure: true }>;

// Composite kind with members
type CleanContext = Kind<"CleanContext", {
  domain: DomainLayer;
  application: ApplicationLayer;
  infrastructure: InfrastructureLayer;
}>;

// Composite kind with members AND constraints
type StrictCleanContext = Kind<"StrictCleanContext", {
  domain: DomainLayer;
  application: ApplicationLayer;
  infrastructure: InfrastructureLayer;
}, {
  noDependency: [
    ["domain", "infrastructure"],
    ["domain", "application"],
  ];
  pure: true;  // applies to this kind's own scope
}>;
```

### The Type Parameters

| Parameter | Required | Purpose |
|-----------|----------|---------|
| `N` (name) | Yes | String literal discriminant — must match the type alias name |
| `Members` | No | Object type mapping member names to their Kind types (plain or `[KindRef, './path']` tuples) |
| `Constraints` | No | `Constraints<Members>` — architectural rules to enforce |
| `_Config` | No | `KindConfig` — `{ wraps?: T; scope?: 'folder' \| 'file' }`. `wraps` makes Kind produce a wrapped type for declaration-level enforcement via direct type annotation. `scope` declares the expected instance scope, validated by the scope plugin. |

### Why `type` Instead of `interface`

KindScript uses `type X = Kind<...>` (type alias), not `interface X extends Kind<...>`. Reasons:

- **No redundant name** — `interface` required the name twice (`interface Foo extends Kind<"Foo">`)
- **Cleaner syntax** — no empty `{}` for leaf kinds
- **Constraints as type parameters** — the 3rd type parameter on `Kind` carries constraints naturally
- **No false inheritance** — `extends` implied OOP inheritance, but kinds are pure type-level concepts

---

## Instance Declarations

An instance maps a Kind to a specific location in a codebase using `satisfies Instance<T, Path>`:

```typescript
import type { Kind, Instance } from 'kindscript';

type DomainLayer = Kind<"DomainLayer">;
type InfrastructureLayer = Kind<"InfrastructureLayer">;

type OrderingContext = Kind<"OrderingContext", {
  domain: DomainLayer;
  infrastructure: InfrastructureLayer;
}, {
  noDependency: [["domain", "infrastructure"]];
}>;

// Instance declaration — context file is inside the directory it governs
export const ordering = {
  domain: {},
  infrastructure: {},
} satisfies Instance<OrderingContext, '.'>;
```

### What `satisfies` Gives Us

The `satisfies` keyword is valid TypeScript — no macros, no transforms, no runtime. It provides:

1. **Type safety** — TypeScript validates the member object structure at compile time
2. **Zero runtime** — `import type` is fully erased; no `kindscript` dependency at runtime
3. **IDE support** — autocomplete, hover docs, go-to-definition all work natively

### Explicit Location

The second type parameter on `Instance<T, Path>` specifies where the instance lives, relative to the declaration file (same resolution semantics as TypeScript imports):

```typescript
// src/context.ts — '.' resolves to src/
export const app = { domain: {}, infra: {} } satisfies Instance<App, '.'>;

// src/architecture.ts — './ordering' resolves to src/ordering/
export const ordering = { domain: {}, infra: {} } satisfies Instance<App, './ordering'>;

// src/components/atoms/Button/Button.tsx — './Button.tsx' resolves to the file itself
export const _ = {} satisfies Instance<AtomSource, './Button.tsx'>;
```

Path syntax determines granularity:
- `'./ordering'` — folder (directory tree, all `.ts` files recursively)
- `'./helpers.ts'` — file (single source file)
- `'./handlers.ts#validate'` — sub-file (specific named export)

Location is required. Omitting it is a scanner error.

---

## Explicit Member Locations

Members can specify their filesystem location explicitly using tuple syntax:

```typescript
type App = Kind<"App", {
  domain: [DomainLayer, './domain'];             // explicit: member lives at ./domain
  application: [ApplicationLayer, './application'];
  infrastructure: [InfraLayer, './infrastructure'];
}>;
```

The tuple `[KindRef, string]` pairs a Kind type with its relative path from the instance root. This decouples member names from filesystem paths — a member named `core` can live at `./domain`, and vice versa.

Without a tuple, the member path is derived from the member name (e.g., member `domain` resolves to `./domain`). Wrapped Kind members (matched by type annotation, not path) always use plain syntax:

```typescript
type OrderModule = Kind<"OrderModule", {
  deciders: Decider;              // wrapped Kind — matched by type annotation, no path needed
  effectors: Effector;            // wrapped Kind — matched by type annotation, no path needed
  helpers: [HelperKind, './lib']; // explicit: helpers are at ./lib, not ./helpers
}>;
```

---

## Location Resolution

KindScript resolves the instance root from the declared path, then derives member paths from explicit locations or member names.

### Root Resolution

The declared path is resolved relative to the directory of the declaring file, using the same semantics as TypeScript import paths:

- `'.'` — directory of the declaring file
- `'./src'` — `src/` subdirectory relative to the declaring file
- `'../sibling'` — a sibling directory one level up

### Composite Instance (Directory Scope)

Given this file at `src/context.ts`:

```typescript
export const ordering = {
  domain: {},
  infrastructure: {},
} satisfies Instance<OrderingContext, '.'>;
```

KindScript resolves:
- **Root:** `src/` (declared path `'.'` resolves to the directory of `context.ts`)
- **domain:** `src/domain/` (root + member name)
- **infrastructure:** `src/infrastructure/` (root + member name)

### Leaf Instance (File Scope)

Given this file at `src/components/atoms/Button/v1.0.0/Button.tsx`:

```typescript
type AtomSource = Kind<"AtomSource", {}, { pure: true }>;

export const _ = {} satisfies Instance<AtomSource, './Button.tsx'>;
```

KindScript resolves:
- **Location:** `Button.tsx` itself (the path ends with `.tsx`, so it's a single file)

Constraints on `AtomSource` (like `pure`) apply only to `Button.tsx`. Other files in the same directory (`Button.stories.tsx`, `Button.test.tsx`) are unaffected.

### Path Granularity

| Path syntax | Example | Resolves to | Constraints apply to |
|-------------|---------|-------------|---------------------|
| No extension | `'.'`, `'./ordering'` | Directory | All `.ts`/`.tsx` files recursively |
| `.ts` / `.tsx` extension | `'./Button.tsx'` | Single file | That file only |
| Hash syntax | `'./handlers.ts#validate'` | Named export in file | That specific export |

### Scope Validation

Kinds can declare their expected instance scope using the `scope` property in `Kind`'s 4th type parameter (`_Config`):

```typescript
type KindConfig = { wraps?: unknown; scope?: 'folder' | 'file' };
```

When a Kind declares a scope, the compiler validates that instance locations match:

```typescript
// This Kind expects instances to point at folders
type PureModule = Kind<"PureModule", {}, { pure: true }, { scope: "folder" }>;

// Valid — '.' resolves to a directory
export const m = {} satisfies Instance<PureModule, '.'>;

// Violation (KS70005) — './module.ts' is a file, not a folder
export const m = {} satisfies Instance<PureModule, './module.ts'>;
```

The scope plugin generates a `Scope` contract during the bind stage and validates it during the check stage. If the instance's resolved location doesn't match the declared scope, a `KS70005: Scope mismatch` diagnostic is produced.

| Declared scope | Instance path must resolve to |
|---------------|------------------------------|
| `"folder"` | A directory (no `.ts`/`.tsx` extension) |
| `"file"` | A file (`.ts` or `.tsx` extension) |
| Not declared | No scope validation (any path is accepted) |

### Nested Members

For kinds with nested members, paths compose naturally:

```typescript
type DomainLayer = Kind<"DomainLayer", {
  entities: EntitiesModule;
  ports: PortsModule;
}>;

type CleanContext = Kind<"CleanContext", {
  domain: DomainLayer;
}>;
```

If the instance is at `src/context.ts`:
- `domain` → `src/domain/`
- `domain.entities` → `src/domain/entities/`
- `domain.ports` → `src/domain/ports/`

---

## Multi-Instance (Bounded Contexts)

Multiple instances of the same Kind can coexist in a project. Each instance has its own root, derived from its file location:

```
src/
  ordering/
    ordering.ts           # OrderingContext instance → root is src/ordering/
    domain/
    infrastructure/
  billing/
    billing.ts            # BillingContext instance → root is src/billing/
    domain/
    adapters/
```

```typescript
// src/ordering/ordering.ts
export const ordering = {
  domain: {},
  infrastructure: {},
} satisfies Instance<OrderingContext, '.'>;

// src/billing/billing.ts
export const billing = {
  domain: {},
  adapters: {},
} satisfies Instance<BillingContext, '.'>;
```

Each instance is checked independently. Contracts on `OrderingContext` only apply to files under `src/ordering/`. Contracts on `BillingContext` only apply to files under `src/billing/`.

---

## Carriers — Internal Representation

**Carriers** are the internal algebraic representation of "what code a symbol operates over." Users don't write carriers directly — they write Kind definitions and Instance declarations. The parser computes carriers from this user-facing syntax.

### Carrier Algebra

A carrier is an algebraic expression built from atoms and operations:

**Atoms:**
- `path` — code at a filesystem path (directory or file, determined at resolution time)
- `annotation` — all declarations annotated with a wrapped Kind type across the entire project

**Operations:**
- `union` — files from any child carrier
- `exclude` — files from base minus files from excluded
- `intersect` — files common to all child carriers

### Example Carriers

```typescript
// Structural Kind instance at './src/domain/'
{ type: 'path', path: '/project/src/domain' }

// Wrapped Kind member (scopeless)
{ type: 'tagged', kindTypeName: 'Decider' }

// Scoped wrapped Kind member (tagged exports within parent scope)
{
  type: 'intersect',
  children: [
    { type: 'tagged', kindTypeName: 'Decider' },
    { type: 'path', path: '/project/src/ordering' }
  ]
}

// Union of multiple paths
{
  type: 'union',
  children: [
    { type: 'path', path: '/project/src/domain' },
    { type: 'path', path: '/project/src/application' }
  ]
}
```

### Key Functions

- `carrierKey(carrier: CarrierExpr): string` — deterministic serialization usable as a Map key. For path carriers, returns the raw path string (ensures backward compatibility with `symbol.id` lookup pattern).
- `hasTaggedAtom(carrier: CarrierExpr): boolean` — checks if a carrier contains a tagged atom, replacing the old `isWrappedKind()` pattern.

### Resolution

Carriers are **pure values** — they have no behavior, no resolution logic, no filesystem access. The `CarrierResolver` service (application layer) translates carrier expressions into concrete file lists by:

1. **Path atoms** — filesystem probing (directory listing or single file)
2. **Tagged atoms** — filtering tagged exports from scan results
3. **Operations** — set algebra on child results (union, intersection, difference)

Scoping is expressed through composition, not built into atoms. A "scoped tagged carrier" is `intersect(tagged(K), path(scope))`.

---

## Discovery via TypeScript Piggybacking

KindScript does not use file extensions, config files, or naming conventions to find definitions. Instead, it piggybacks on TypeScript's own type checker.

### How Discovery Works

1. The `ASTAdapter` walks each source file in the TypeScript program
2. For type aliases, it uses `checker.getSymbolAtLocation()` to check if the type reference resolves to `Kind` from the `'kindscript'` package
3. For `satisfies` expressions, it checks if the type reference resolves to `Instance` from `'kindscript'`
4. This works through aliases, re-exports, and any valid TypeScript import path

### What This Means

- **No `.k.ts` extension** — definitions live in regular `.ts` files
- **No `kindscript.json`** — no config file needed for discovery
- **No naming convention** — any file name works
- **Alias-safe** — `import type { Kind as K } from 'kindscript'` works (because the type checker resolves the original symbol)
- **Invisible** — KindScript adds zero artifacts to a project beyond the type imports

---

## MemberMap

`MemberMap<T>` is the internal type projection used by `Instance<T, Path>` — it transforms a Kind into the object shape you write with `satisfies`. Users typically use `Instance<T, Path>` directly and never reference `MemberMap<T>` themselves.

The `MemberMap<T>` type transforms a Kind type into its instance shape — the object type used with `satisfies Instance<T, Path>`:

```typescript
type MemberMap<T extends KindRef> = {
  [K in keyof T as K extends 'kind' | 'location' | '__kindscript_ref' | '__kindscript_brand' ? never : K]:
    T[K] extends KindRef
      ? MemberMap<T[K]> | Record<string, never>
      : never;
};
```

It strips the `kind`, `location`, and internal phantom properties (which are derived automatically), keeps member names, and recursively applies to child Kinds. Each member value is either a nested `MemberMap` (for Kinds with sub-members) or an empty object `{}` (for leaf Kinds). `KindRef` is a shared phantom marker type that both wrapped and structural Kinds satisfy. When members use tuple syntax (`[KindRef, string]`), `MemberMap` extracts the Kind from the tuple.

Member names must be valid TypeScript identifiers. By default, member names double as directory names for location resolution (e.g., member `domain` resolves to `./domain`). With explicit tuple locations, the path is independent of the name — a member named `core` at `[CoreKind, './domain']` resolves to `./domain`.

---

## Wrapped Kinds — Declaration-Level Enforcement

Where a plain Kind classifies **places** (directories and files), a wrapped Kind classifies **types** (individual exported declarations via their type annotations). A wrapped Kind is any Kind whose 4th type parameter (`_Config`) includes `wraps`.

### Defining a Wrapped Kind

```typescript
import type { Kind } from 'kindscript';

type DeciderFn = (command: Command) => readonly Event[];
type Decider = Kind<"Decider", {}, {}, { wraps: DeciderFn }>;

// With constraints (3rd parameter):
type PureDecider = Kind<"PureDecider", {}, { pure: true }, { wraps: DeciderFn }>;
```

The 4th parameter `{ wraps: DeciderFn }` tells KindScript this Kind classifies individual declarations, not directories. The implementation uses a phantom brand: `T & { readonly __kindscript_brand?: N }`. The brand is optional, so any value of the wrapped type satisfies the Kind — zero assignability impact.

### Wrapped Kind Instances

Instances of wrapped Kinds are declared with a direct type annotation on exports — no `satisfies`, no `register()`, no companion const:

```typescript
import type { Kind } from 'kindscript';

type DeciderFn = (command: Command) => readonly Event[];
type Decider = Kind<"Decider", {}, {}, { wraps: DeciderFn }>;

// These are wrapped Kind instances (direct type annotation):
export const validateOrder: Decider = (cmd) => { ... };
export const applyDiscount: Decider = (cmd) => { ... };

// This is NOT an instance (DeciderFn is not a wrapped Kind):
export const helper: DeciderFn = (cmd) => { ... };

// This is NOT an instance (no explicit type annotation):
export const inline = (cmd: Command): Event[] => { ... };
```

Discovery is **syntactic** — the scanner checks whether the type annotation explicitly names a wrapped Kind type, not whether the value structurally matches. The developer's choice of type name is the opt-in signal.

### Composability with Structural Kinds

Wrapped Kind members can be used inside filesystem Kinds, enabling cross-scope constraints:

```typescript
type Decider = Kind<"Decider", {}, {}, { wraps: DeciderFn }>;
type Effector = Kind<"Effector", {}, {}, { wraps: EffectorFn }>;

type OrderModule = Kind<"OrderModule", {
  deciders: Decider;
  effectors: Effector;
}, {
  noDependency: [["deciders", "effectors"]];
}>;

export const order = {
  deciders: {},
  effectors: {},
} satisfies Instance<OrderModule, '.'>;
```

This means: "within the OrderModule directory, collect all `Decider`-typed exports into one group and all `Effector`-typed exports into another. No file containing a Decider may import from a file containing an Effector."

The binder resolves wrapped Kind members by scanning typed exports within the parent Kind's scope. Existing constraints (`noDependency`, `noCycles`, etc.) work unchanged — they operate on the symbol's resolved files, which the binder populates for both filesystem and wrapped Kind members.

### Wrapped Kind vs Structural Kind

| Aspect | Structural Kind | Wrapped Kind |
|--------|----------------|--------------|
| Classifies | Places (directories, files) | Types (exported declarations) |
| Scope | Directory or file | Individual declaration |
| Instance mechanism | `satisfies Instance<T, Path>` | Direct type annotation |
| Resolution | Filesystem paths (binder) | Typed-export collection within scope (binder) |
| Members | Subdirectories | As Kind members (composability) |
| Standalone constraints | All constraint types | All user-declared constraint types (via 3rd parameter) |
| Syntax | `Kind<N, Members, C>` | `Kind<N, {}, C, { wraps: T }>` |

---

## Public API

KindScript exports six types from `src/types/index.ts`:

| Type | Purpose |
|------|---------|
| `Kind<N, Members?, Constraints?, Config?>` | Define an architectural pattern (conditional type) |
| `Instance<T, Path>` | Declare where a structural Kind is instantiated (used with `satisfies`) |
| `MemberMap<T>` | Transforms a Kind type into its instance object shape (used internally by `Instance`) |
| `Constraints<Members>` | Type for the constraints parameter (usually inlined) |
| `KindConfig` | `{ wraps?: T; scope?: 'folder' \| 'file' }` — Kind behavior configuration |
| `KindRef` | Phantom marker type — shared by both wrapped and structural Kinds |

All exports are `export type` — zero runtime footprint.
